when we watch a film or a play we know
that the actors probably learned their
lines from a script which essentially
tells them what to say and when to say
it a piece of written music operates on
exactly the same principle in a very
basic sense it tells a performer what to
play and when to play it aesthetically
speaking there's a world of difference
between say Beethoven and Justin Bieber
but both artists have used the same
building blocks to create their music
notes and although the end result can
sound quite complicated the logic behind
musical notes is actually pretty
straightforward let's take a look at the
foundational elements to music notation
and how they interact to create a work
of art music is written on five parallel
lines that go across the page these five
lines are called a staff and a staff
operates on two axes up and down and
left to right the up and down axis tells
the performer the pitch of the note or
what note to play and the left-to-right
access tells the performer the rhythm of
the note or when to play it let's start
with pitch to help us out we're going to
use a piano but this system works for
pretty much any instrument you can think
of in the western music tradition
pitches are named after the first seven
letters of the alphabet a b c d e f and
g after that the cycle repeats itself
abcdefg abcdefg and so on but how do
these pictures get their names well for
example if you played an F and then
played another F higher or lower on the
piano you'd notice that they sound
pretty similar compared to say a B going
back to the staff every line and every
space between two lines represents a
separate pitch if we put a note in one
of these lines or in one of these faces
we're telling a performer to play that
pitch the higher up on the staff our
note is placed the higher the pitch but
there are obviously many many more
pitches in the 9th at these lines and
spaces give us a grand piano for example
can play 88 separate notes so how do we
condense 88 notes onto a single staff we
use something called a cliff a cliff is
a weird-looking figure placed at the
very beginning of the star
and it acts like a reference point
telling you that a particular line or
space corresponds to a specific note on
your instrument if we want to play notes
that aren't on the staff we kind of
cheat and draw extra little lines called
ledger lines and place the notes on them
if we have to draw so many ledger lines
that it gets confusing then we need to
change to a different cliff as for
telling a performer when to play the
notes two main elements control this the
beat and the rhythm the beat of a piece
of music is by itself kind of boring it
sounds like this notice that it doesn't
change it just plugs along quite happily
you can go slow or fast or whatever you
like really the point is that just like
the second hand on a clock divides one
minute into 60 seconds with each second
just as long as every other second the
beat divides a piece of music into
little fragments of time that are all
the same length beats where the steady
beat is a foundation we can start adding
rhythm to our pitches and that's when
music really starts to happen this is a
quarter note it's the most basic unit of
rhythm and it's worth one beat this is a
half note and it's worth two beats this
whole know here is worth four beats and
these little guys are eighth notes worth
half a beat each great you say what does
that mean you might have noticed that
across the length of a staff there are
little lines dividing it into small
sections these are bar lines and we
refer to each section as a bar at the
beginning of a piece of music just after
the cliff is something called the time
signature which tells the performer how
many beats are in each bar this says
there are two beats in each bar this
says there are three this one four and
so on the bottom number tells us what
kind of note is to be used as the basic
unit for the beat one corresponds to a
whole note two to a half note four to a
quarter note and eight to an eighth note
and so on so this time signature here
tells us that there are four quarter
notes in each bar one two three four one
two three
four and so on but like I said before if
we just stick to the beat it gets kind
of boring so we'll replace some quarter
notes with different rhythms notice that
even though the number of notes in each
bar has changed the total number of
beats in each bar hasn't so what does
our musical creation sound like sounds
okay but maybe a bit thin right let's
add another instrument of its own pitch
and rhythm now it's sounding like music
sure it takes some practice to get used
to reading it quickly and playing what
we see on our instrument but with a bit
of time and patience you could be the
next paper or Justin Bieber
you